Atherosclerosis that develops in the arteries of your legs — or, less commonly, your arms — causes peripheral arterial disease. Like atherosclerosis in your heart (coronary) arteries, a collection of fatty plaque in your blood vessel walls causes peripheral vascular disease. As plaque builds up, your blood vessels get narrower and narrower, until they’re blocked.

Tobacco use is the most important risk factor for PAD and its complications. In fact, 80% of people with PAD are people who currently smoke or used to smoke. Tobacco use increases the risk for PAD by 400%. It also brings on PAD symptoms almost 10 years earlier.

Compared with nonsmokers of the same age, people who smoke and have PAD are more likely to:

	Die of heart attack or stroke.

	Have poorer results with bypass surgery procedures on their legs.

	Have a limb amputation.

Regardless of your sex, you’re at risk of developing peripheral arterial disease when you have one or more of these risk factors:

	Using tobacco products (the most potent risk factor).

	Having diabetes.

	Being age 50 and older.

	Being African American.

	Having a personal or family history of heart or blood vessel disease.

	Having high blood pressure (hypertension).

	Having high cholesterol (hyperlipidemia).

	Having abdominal obesity.

	Having a blood clotting disorder.

	Having kidney disease (both a risk factor and a consequence of PAD).

Although PAD is a different condition from coronary artery disease, the two are related. People who have one are likely to have the other. A person with PAD has a higher risk of coronary artery disease, heart attack, stroke or a transient ischemic attack (mini-stroke) than someone without peripheral artery disease. A person with heart disease has a 1 in 3 chance of having peripheral artery disease in their legs.

Not surprisingly, the two diseases also share some common risk factors. This is because these risk factors cause the same changes in arteries in your arms and legs as they do in your heart’s arteries.